.TH maas\-import\-pxe-files 8 "16 July 2012" maas "maas"
.SH NAME
\fBmaas\-import\-pxe-files\fP \- import Ubuntu install images into MAAS

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmaas\-import\-pxe\-files\fP downloads Ubuntu images and installs them into
MAAS.  The MAAS server needs these images to provides nodes with operating
systems.  Images that are already in place are kept unchanged, unless the
version in the archive has since been updated.

The script reads a configuration file \fI/etc/maas/import_isos\fP in order
to determine:
 - ARCHIVE: Location of the Ubuntu download archive
 - RELEASES: Ubuntu releases to download
 - CURRENT_RELEASE: Most up-to-date Ubuntu release
 - ARCHES: Architectures for which images should be downloaded

(To support development setups that run directly from a code branch, it will
also look for \fIetc/maas/import_isos\fP relative to the current directory).

The script uses \fBwget\fP(1) to download the kernel and initrd image for
each architecture in ARCHES and each release in RELEASES.  It will also
download the current pre-boot loader for each architecture in ARCHES that
uses this loader.  It always uses the loader from CURRENT_RELEASE.

These images are the minimum that's required to start installng a node.
During installation, a node may download its packages over the network.

A \fBcron\fP(8) job typically runs this script at a quiet time every Sunday,
but you may need to run it manually once for a new MAAS installation.

.SH FILES
\fI/etc/maas/import_isos\fP, \fI/etc/cron.d/maas\-import\-pxe\-files\fP

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR maas\-import\-ephemerals (8),
.BR maas\-import\-isos (8),
.BR cron (8), 
.BR wget (1)

.TP
\fIhttp://launchpad.net/maas\fP
.PD

.SH AUTHOR
This manual page and the script were written by Jeroen Vermeulen
<jeroen.vermeulen@canonical.com> for Ubuntu systems, but may be used by
others.  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document and the utility under the terms of the GNU General Public
License, Version 3 published by the Free Software Foundation.

The complete text of the GNU General Public License can be found in
\fI/usr/share/common-licenses/GPL\fP on Debian/Ubuntu systems, or on
the web at \fIhttp://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.txt\fP.
